
#Action potentials
2016-06-01

An action potential is a short-lasting event in which the electrical membrane potential of a cell rapidly rises and falls, following a consistent trajectory. Action potentials occur in several types of animal cells, called excitable cells, which include neurons, muscle cells, and endocrine cells, as well as in some plant cells. Neurons play a central role in cell-to-cell communication. In other types of cells, their main function is to activate intracellular processes. In muscle cells, for example, an action potential is the first step in the chain of events leading to contraction. In beta cells of the pancreas, they provoke release of insulin.

Action potentials in neurons are also known as "*nerve impulses*" or "*spikes*", and the temporal sequence of action potentials generated by a neuron is called its "*spike train*". A neuron that emits an action potential is often said to "*fire*".

Action potentials are generated by special types of voltage-gated ion channels embedded in a cell's plasma membrane. These channels are shut when the membrane potential is near the resting potential of the cell, but they rapidly begin to open if the membrane potential increases to a precisely defined threshold value. When the channels open (in response to depolarization in transmembrane voltage), they allow an inward flow of sodium ions, which changes the electrochemical gradient, which in turn produces a further rise in the membrane potential. This then causes more channels to open, producing a greater electric current across the cell membrane, and so on. The process proceeds explosively until all of the available ion channels are open, resulting in a large upswing in the membrane potential. The rapid influx of sodium ions causes the polarity of the plasma membrane to reverse, and the ion channels then rapidly inactivate. As the sodium channels close, sodium ions can no longer enter the neuron, and then they are actively transported back out of the plasma membrane. Potassium channels are then activated, and there is an outward current of potassium ions, returning the electrochemical gradient to the resting state. After an action potential has occurred, there is a transient negative shift, called the afterhyperpolarization or refractory period, due to additional potassium currents. This mechanism prevents an action potential from traveling back the way it just came.

In animal cells, there are two primary types of action potentials:
* Generated by voltage-gated sodium channels: last for under one millisecond
* Generated by voltage-gated calcium channels: may last for 100 milliseconds or longer.

***Tags***: Neuroscience

## See also
## See also:
[EPSP](/epsp), [IPSP](/ipsp)
## Material
* https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OZG8M_ldA1M

## Papers
* Lewicki, M. S. (1998). [A review of methods for spike sorting: the detection and classification of neural action potentials](http://stat.columbia.edu/~liam/teaching/neurostat-spr11/papers/EM/Lewicki-Network-98_1.pdf). Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 9(4), R53-R78.
* Hodgkin, A. L., & Huxley, A. F. (1939). [Action potentials recorded from inside a nerve fibre](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v144/n3651/abs/144710a0.html). Nature, 144(3651), 710-711.


